README.md, before:

# cura-build

This repository contains build scripts used to build Cura and all dependencies from scratch.

## OS X

1. Install latest version of Xcode.
    * You may also need to run ```xcode-select --install``` for some XCode commands to be available from the command line.
2. Install [homebrew](http://brew.sh/).
3. Install CMake (```brew install cmake```).
4. On Mac OS X > 10.10, run these commands (needed to build Python packaging libraries):
```
brew update
brew install openssl
brew link openssl --force
```
5. Because Fortran is necessary: *brew install gcc* (Fortran used to be a separate installation but not anymore.  Building gcc can take over 6 hours depending on your computer.)
6. You may need to run the following to build Qt:
```cd /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/usr/bin/
sudo ln -s xcodebuild xcrun
```
7. Run these commands from the Cura2Build directory:
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

## Windows

On Windows, the following dependencies are needed for building:

* **git for windows** (https://git-for-windows.github.io/)
  * The `git` command should be available on your `%PATH%`. Make sure that the `cmd` directory in the git for windows installation directory is on the `%PATH%` and *not* its `bin` directory, otherwise mingw32 will complain about `sh.exe` being on the path.
* **CMake** (http://www.cmake.org/)
  * Once CMake is installed make sure it is available on your `%PATH%`. Check this by running `cmake --version` in the Windows console.
* **MinGW-W64** >= 4.9.04 (https://wiki.qt.io/MinGW-64-bit)
  * Once installed, its `bin` directory should be available on your `%PATH%`. Test this by running `mingw32-make --version` in the Windows console.
  * MinGW can be installed on different ways, but these were tested (without guarentees):
    * MinGW w64 installer (32-/64bit): Install the correct target architecture and make sure you choose:
      * Version := 4.9.3
      * Architecture := i686 (here for 32bit)
      * Threads := posix
      * Exception := dwarf
      * Build revision := 1
    * Qt5 Installer (32bit only): You can install "MinGW 4.9.2" using their "Maintenance Tool" as a component from the category "Tools"
    * When looking for other resources, make sure you download the posix flavour of MinGW. It is the only version, which is C++11 compatible (for more info take a look at the Qt docs).
* **Python** >= 3.5.2 (http://python.org/)
  * You will need the latest version of pip `python -m pip install -U pip`
* **cx_Freeze**
  * `pip install cx_Freeze`
  * As of 1-26-2017 the latest version of cx_Freeze (5.0.1) does not support Python 3.5.1 without a patch: https://bitbucket.org/anthony_tuininga/cx_freeze/issues/225/cxfreeze-module-dis-has-no-attribute
* **NumPy** (http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/#numpy)
  * __NOTE__: make sure to get the NON-MKL version!
  * __NOTE__: CJ: It looks like this needs MKL, the above link only provides MKL versions, and Ultimaker Cura uses MKL.
* **SciPy** (http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/#scipy)
* **Py2Exe** (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/py2exe/0.9.2.0/#downloads)
  * The easiest way to install this is to run the command `pip install py2exe`. The executable `build_exe.exe` should now be in your `<python dir>/Scripts` directory. You may have to add `<python dir>/Scripts` to you `%PATH%`.
* **Numpy-STL** (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/numpy-stl)
  * Also the easiest way to install is via `pip3 install numpy-stl`.
* **Zeroconf** (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/zeroconf)
  * Again the easiest way to install is via `pip3 install zeroconf`.
* **Microsoft Visual Studio 2015 (community edition)**:
  Go to "custom installation" and choose:
    * Programming languages:
      * Visual c++ (all)
      * Python Tools for Visual Studio (Nov 2015)
    * Windows & Web Development:
      * Universal Windows App Development Tools:
        * Tools 1.2
        * Windows 10 SDK 10.0.10586
        * Windows 10 SDK 10.0.10240
* **NSIS 3** (http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page)
  * This application is neeeded to create the installer.
  * You'll need to add the path to your NSIS folder to your system path. (You don't need to add NSIS/bin)
  * Be sure to include the Language files in the installation.
* **SIP**
  * `pip install SIP`
* **PyQt 5.4**
  * `pip install pyqt5`

Make sure these dependencies are available from your path.

Additionally, for 32-bit builds:

* Perl (http://www.activestate.com/activeperl, Required to build Qt)
* Create in the user directory a file named pydistutils.cfg with the following contents:
  * CJ: Not sure what the point of noting the compiler to be mingw32 is when much of the binaries are being compiled by msbuild.  This step may not be needed.
```shell
[build]
compiler=mingw32
```

```shell
REM 32-bit
mkdir build-32
cd build-32
cmake -G "MinGW Makefiles" -DCURA_MAJOR_VERSION=2 -DCURA_MINOR_VERSION=2 -DCURA_PATCH_VERSION=0 ..
mingw32-make package
```

For 64-bit builds:

* PyQt 5.4 (https://riverbankcomputing.com/software/pyqt/download5, Building PyQt currently fails using MinGW 64-bit)
    * CJ: Not sure why this is only in 64-bit instructions because the build scripts require PyQt for 32-bit as well and this project seems to be built upon PyQt.
* Install protobuf.wheel found in cura-build-binaries (TODO: create cura-build-binaries repo)
  * This step may not be needed.
* Create empty ```__init__.py``` in c:\Python34\Lib\site-packages\google (TODO: make it part of the proto.wheel installation)
  * This step may not be needed.

```shell
REM 64-bit
mkdir build-64
cd build-64
cmake -G "MinGW Makefiles" -DBUILD_64BIT=ON -DCURA_MAJOR_VERSION=2 -DCURA_MINOR_VERSION=2 -DCURA_PATCH_VERSION=0 ..
mingw32-make
mingw32-make package
```

Before make package - copy arduino to cura-build/
  * This step may not be needed.  The arduino folder is already in the inst folder.

## Ubuntu/Linux

cura-build can build Ubuntu/Debian packages of Cura.

Dependencies:

* python3 (>= 3.4.0)
* python3-dev (>= 3.4.0)
* python3-pyqt5 (>= 5.4.0)
* python3-pyqt5.qtopengl (>= 5.4.0)
* python3-pyqt5.qtquick (>= 5.4.0)
* python3-pyqt5.qtsvg (>= 5.4.0)
* python3-numpy (>= 1.8.0)
* python3-serial (>= 2.6)
* python3-opengl (>= 3.0)
* python3-setuptools
* python3-dev
* qml-module-qtquick2 (>= 5.4.0)
* qml-module-qtquick-window2 (>= 5.4.0)
* qml-module-qtquick-layouts (>= 5.4.0)
* qml-module-qtquick-dialogs (>= 5.4.0)
* qml-module-qtquick-controls (>= 5.4.0)
* libxcb1-dev
* libx11-dev
* zlib1g
* build-essential
* pkg-config
* cmake
* gfortran

To build, make sure these dependencies are installed, then clone this repository and run the following commands from your clone:

```shell
sudo apt-get install gfortran python3 python3-dev python3-pyqt5 python3-pyqt5.qtopengl python3-pyqt5.qtquick python3-pyqt5.qtsvg python3-numpy python3-serial python3-opengl python3-setuptools qml-module-qtquick2 qml-module-qtquick-window2 qml-module-qtquick-layouts qml-module-qtquick-dialogs qml-module-qtquick-controls gfortran pkg-config libxcb1-dev libx11-dev
git clone http://github.com/Ultimaker/cura-build.git
cd cura-build
```

```shell
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
make package
```
## CentOS/Linux

cura-build can build CentOS/RHEL packages of Cura.

Dependencies:

* gcc-gfortran
* python34.x86_64
* python34-devel.x86_64
* python34-numpy.x86_64
* pyserial.noarch
* PyOpenGL.noarch
* python34-setuptools.noarch
* wxPython.x86_64
* libstdc++-static.x86_64
* libstdc++-devel.x86_64
* openssl.x86_64
* openblas-devel.x86_64
* python34-numpy-f2py.x86_64

To build, make sure these dependencies are installed, then clone this repository and run the following commands from your clone:

```shell
sudo yum install gcc-gfortran python34.x86_64 python34-devel.x86_64 python34-numpy.x86_64 pyserial.noarch PyOpenGL.noarch python34-setuptools.noarch wxPython.x86_64 libstdc++-static.x86_64 libstdc++-devel.x86_64 openssl.x86_64 openblas-devel.x86_64 python34-numpy-f2py.x86_64
```
1. download and install scipy from https://github.com/scipy/scipy/releases be sure to use python 3.4, eg. using sudo python3 setup.py 2. install (version in repository is for python 2.7)
3. download and install CMake from https://cmake.org/download/ and configure CMake to use ssl
4. download and install Qt5 from https://www.qt.io/download/
5. download and install PyQt5 from https://www.riverbankcomputing.com/software/pyqt/download5
6. download and install sip from https://www.riverbankcomputing.com/software/sip/download make sure the verion is 4.18 or newer

Alternative method for installing python at: https://edwards.sdsu.edu/research/installing-python3-4-and-the-scipy-stack-on-centos/ .
Make sure, that the PYTHONPATH can find dist-packages.

```shell
git clone http://github.com/Ultimaker/cura-build.git
cd cura-build
```

```shell
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
make package
```

Commit message:

Updated Mac support.  The Mac build works now as long as CuraApplication is changed back to "cura" from "cura_lulzbot".
Part of T627.

README.md, after:

# cura-build

This repository contains build scripts used to build Cura and all dependencies from scratch.

## OS X

1. Install latest version of Xcode.
    * You may also need to run ```xcode-select --install``` for some XCode commands to be available from the command line.
2. Install [homebrew](http://brew.sh/).
3. Install CMake (```brew install cmake```).
4. On Mac OS X > 10.10, run these commands (needed to build Python packaging libraries):
```
brew update
brew install openssl
brew link openssl --force
```
5. Because Fortran is necessary: *brew install gcc* (Fortran used to be a separate installation but not anymore.  Building gcc can take over 6 hours depending on your computer.)
6. You may need to run the following to build Qt:
```cd /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/usr/bin/
sudo ln -s xcodebuild xcrun
```
7. Run these commands from the Cura2Build directory:
```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

To debug Cura.app, you need the Console open (```open -a Console```) to see stdout and stderr.  You can filter the visible events to "Cura" in the Console Search bar.

## Windows

On Windows, the following dependencies are needed for building:

* **git for windows** (https://git-for-windows.github.io/)
  * The `git` command should be available on your `%PATH%`. Make sure that the `cmd` directory in the git for windows installation directory is on the `%PATH%` and *not* its `bin` directory, otherwise mingw32 will complain about `sh.exe` being on the path.
* **CMake** (http://www.cmake.org/)
  * Once CMake is installed make sure it is available on your `%PATH%`. Check this by running `cmake --version` in the Windows console.
* **MinGW-W64** >= 4.9.04 (https://wiki.qt.io/MinGW-64-bit)
  * Once installed, its `bin` directory should be available on your `%PATH%`. Test this by running `mingw32-make --version` in the Windows console.
  * MinGW can be installed on different ways, but these were tested (without guarentees):
    * MinGW w64 installer (32-/64bit): Install the correct target architecture and make sure you choose:
      * Version := 4.9.3
      * Architecture := i686 (here for 32bit)
      * Threads := posix
      * Exception := dwarf
      * Build revision := 1
    * Qt5 Installer (32bit only): You can install "MinGW 4.9.2" using their "Maintenance Tool" as a component from the category "Tools"
    * When looking for other resources, make sure you download the posix flavour of MinGW. It is the only version, which is C++11 compatible (for more info take a look at the Qt docs).
* **Python** >= 3.5.2 (http://python.org/)
  * You will need the latest version of pip `python -m pip install -U pip`
* **cx_Freeze**
  * `pip install cx_Freeze`
  * As of 1-26-2017 the latest version of cx_Freeze (5.0.1) does not support Python 3.5.1 without a patch: https://bitbucket.org/anthony_tuininga/cx_freeze/issues/225/cxfreeze-module-dis-has-no-attribute
* **NumPy** (http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/#numpy)
  * __NOTE__: make sure to get the NON-MKL version!
  * __NOTE__: CJ: It looks like this needs MKL, the above link only provides MKL versions, and Ultimaker Cura uses MKL.
* **SciPy** (http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/#scipy)
* **Py2Exe** (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/py2exe/0.9.2.0/#downloads)
  * The easiest way to install this is to run the command `pip install py2exe`. The executable `build_exe.exe` should now be in your `<python dir>/Scripts` directory. You may have to add `<python dir>/Scripts` to you `%PATH%`.
* **Numpy-STL** (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/numpy-stl)
  * Also the easiest way to install is via `pip3 install numpy-stl`.
* **Zeroconf** (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/zeroconf)
  * Again the easiest way to install is via `pip3 install zeroconf`.
* **Microsoft Visual Studio 2015 (community edition)**:
  Go to "custom installation" and choose:
    * Programming languages:
      * Visual c++ (all)
      * Python Tools for Visual Studio (Nov 2015)
    * Windows & Web Development:
      * Universal Windows App Development Tools:
        * Tools 1.2
        * Windows 10 SDK 10.0.10586
        * Windows 10 SDK 10.0.10240
* **NSIS 3** (http://nsis.sourceforge.net/Main_Page)
  * This application is neeeded to create the installer.
  * You'll need to add the path to your NSIS folder to your system path. (You don't need to add NSIS/bin)
  * Be sure to include the Language files in the installation.
* **SIP**
  * `pip install SIP`
* **PyQt 5.4**
  * `pip install pyqt5`

Make sure these dependencies are available from your path.

Additionally, for 32-bit builds:

* Perl (http://www.activestate.com/activeperl, Required to build Qt)
* Create in the user directory a file named pydistutils.cfg with the following contents:
  * CJ: Not sure what the point of noting the compiler to be mingw32 is when much of the binaries are being compiled by msbuild.  This step may not be needed.
```shell
[build]
compiler=mingw32
```

```shell
REM 32-bit
mkdir build-32
cd build-32
cmake -G "MinGW Makefiles" -DCURA_MAJOR_VERSION=2 -DCURA_MINOR_VERSION=2 -DCURA_PATCH_VERSION=0 ..
mingw32-make package
```

For 64-bit builds:

* PyQt 5.4 (https://riverbankcomputing.com/software/pyqt/download5, Building PyQt currently fails using MinGW 64-bit)
    * CJ: Not sure why this is only in 64-bit instructions because the build scripts require PyQt for 32-bit as well and this project seems to be built upon PyQt.
* Install protobuf.wheel found in cura-build-binaries (TODO: create cura-build-binaries repo)
  * This step may not be needed.
* Create empty ```__init__.py``` in c:\Python34\Lib\site-packages\google (TODO: make it part of the proto.wheel installation)
  * This step may not be needed.

```shell
REM 64-bit
mkdir build-64
cd build-64
cmake -G "MinGW Makefiles" -DBUILD_64BIT=ON -DCURA_MAJOR_VERSION=2 -DCURA_MINOR_VERSION=2 -DCURA_PATCH_VERSION=0 ..
mingw32-make
mingw32-make package
```

Before make package - copy arduino to cura-build/
  * This step may not be needed.  The arduino folder is already in the inst folder.

## Ubuntu/Linux

cura-build can build Ubuntu/Debian packages of Cura.

Dependencies:

* python3 (>= 3.4.0)
* python3-dev (>= 3.4.0)
* python3-pyqt5 (>= 5.4.0)
* python3-pyqt5.qtopengl (>= 5.4.0)
* python3-pyqt5.qtquick (>= 5.4.0)
* python3-pyqt5.qtsvg (>= 5.4.0)
* python3-numpy (>= 1.8.0)
* python3-serial (>= 2.6)
* python3-opengl (>= 3.0)
* python3-setuptools
* python3-dev
* qml-module-qtquick2 (>= 5.4.0)
* qml-module-qtquick-window2 (>= 5.4.0)
* qml-module-qtquick-layouts (>= 5.4.0)
* qml-module-qtquick-dialogs (>= 5.4.0)
* qml-module-qtquick-controls (>= 5.4.0)
* libxcb1-dev
* libx11-dev
* zlib1g
* build-essential
* pkg-config
* cmake
* gfortran

To build, make sure these dependencies are installed, then clone this repository and run the following commands from your clone:

```shell
sudo apt-get install gfortran python3 python3-dev python3-pyqt5 python3-pyqt5.qtopengl python3-pyqt5.qtquick python3-pyqt5.qtsvg python3-numpy python3-serial python3-opengl python3-setuptools qml-module-qtquick2 qml-module-qtquick-window2 qml-module-qtquick-layouts qml-module-qtquick-dialogs qml-module-qtquick-controls gfortran pkg-config libxcb1-dev libx11-dev
git clone http://github.com/Ultimaker/cura-build.git
cd cura-build
```

```shell
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
make package
```
## CentOS/Linux

cura-build can build CentOS/RHEL packages of Cura.

Dependencies:

* gcc-gfortran
* python34.x86_64
* python34-devel.x86_64
* python34-numpy.x86_64
* pyserial.noarch
* PyOpenGL.noarch
* python34-setuptools.noarch
* wxPython.x86_64
* libstdc++-static.x86_64
* libstdc++-devel.x86_64
* openssl.x86_64
* openblas-devel.x86_64
* python34-numpy-f2py.x86_64

To build, make sure these dependencies are installed, then clone this repository and run the following commands from your clone:

```shell
sudo yum install gcc-gfortran python34.x86_64 python34-devel.x86_64 python34-numpy.x86_64 pyserial.noarch PyOpenGL.noarch python34-setuptools.noarch wxPython.x86_64 libstdc++-static.x86_64 libstdc++-devel.x86_64 openssl.x86_64 openblas-devel.x86_64 python34-numpy-f2py.x86_64
```
1. download and install scipy from https://github.com/scipy/scipy/releases be sure to use python 3.4, eg. using sudo python3 setup.py 2. install (version in repository is for python 2.7)
3. download and install CMake from https://cmake.org/download/ and configure CMake to use ssl
4. download and install Qt5 from https://www.qt.io/download/
5. download and install PyQt5 from https://www.riverbankcomputing.com/software/pyqt/download5
6. download and install sip from https://www.riverbankcomputing.com/software/sip/download make sure the verion is 4.18 or newer

Alternative method for installing python at: https://edwards.sdsu.edu/research/installing-python3-4-and-the-scipy-stack-on-centos/ .
Make sure, that the PYTHONPATH can find dist-packages.

```shell
git clone http://github.com/Ultimaker/cura-build.git
cd cura-build
```

```shell
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
make package
```
